SPEC CPU2000 Benchmark Description File

Benchmark Name: TimberWolfSC placement and global routing package.

Benchmark Author: Bill Swartz <Bill_Swartz@internetcad.com>

Benchmark Program General Category: Computer Aided Design

Benchmark Description:
The TimberWolfSC placement and global routing package is used in the process
of creating the lithography artwork needed for the production of microchips.
Specifically, it determines the placement and global connections for groups
of transistors (known as standard cells) which constitute the microchip.
The placement problem is a permutation. Therefore, a simple or brute force
exploration of the state space would take an execution time proportional to
the factorial of the input size.  For problems as small as 70 cells, a brute
force algorithm would take longer than the age of the universe on the world's
fastest computer.   Instead, the TimberWolfSC program uses simulated annealing
as a heuristic to find very good solutions for the row-based standard cell
design style.  In this design style, transistors are grouped together to form
standard cells.  These standard cells are placed in rows so that all cells of
a row may share power and ground connections by abutment.  The simulated
annealing algorithm has found the best known solutions to a large group of
placement problems.  The global router which follows the placement step
interconnects the microchip design.  It utilizes a constructive algorithm
followed by iterative improvement.

The basic simulated annealing algorithm has not changed since its
inception in 1983.  The version in the SPEC suite is the most numerically
intensive version.  Recent versions have reduced runtimes by clever reductions
in the search space.  However, the move strategy and cost functions are
identical to later versions.

The version of TimberWolfSC that has been submitted to SPEC has been customized
for SPEC.  It has been modified specifically for the benchmark suite so that
it would have a behavior that captures the flavor of many implementations of
simulated annealing.  The submitted program spends most of its time in the
inner loop calculations.  By doing this, this version traverses memory often
creating cache misses.  In fact, this version running small jobs looks like
later simulated annealing versions running on large jobs.  This was to insure
that the benchmark would be applicable to future versions of the program
running large instances.  The submitted version should be a computers worst
nightmare, yet realistic for future problems.


Input Description:
Three test problems are provided for SPEC benchmark.  The first
problem is a small synchronous circuit which is being placed and routed
as a subchip.  The second test circuit is the MCNC primary 1 benchmark
circuit, one of the most frequently executed benchmark circuits.  The
third test case is a structured circuit found in the MCNC benchmark
suite.  In all cases, the TimberWolf program is required to determine
the position of the standard cells and determine the interconnection
of the netlist.  In addition, the global router must add extra cells
known as feedthrus to complete the route if not enough space is present
between two adjacent standard cells.  The input files consist of the
block description file or <designName>.blk file, the netlist file or
<designName>.cel file, the net weighting file or <designName>.net file
and the parameter file or <designName>.par file.  The block file describes
the number and position of the rows where standard cells are to be placed.
A valid placement is one in which all of the cells are placed within the
specified rows without any overlap between cells.  The netlist file
contains a description of the standard cells as well as the connection
network between cells.  At this time the physical location of these connections
has not been determined.

Output Description:
For each test circuit, two output files of significance are created : the
placement file or the <designName>.pl1, and the global routing file or the
<designName>.pin file.  The placement file consists of ascii data arranged
in seven fields.  The meaning of the seven fields are as follows:

<Standard cell instance> <llx> <lly> <urx> <ury> <orientation> <row>

where llx, lly, urx, ury are the four corners of a bounding box which
contain the standard cell instance.   The orientation has eight possible
values:
(0) Orientation 0 is the cell geometry as described as in the input.
(1) Orientation 1 is the cell geometry after mirroring the y coordinates with
    respect to orientation 0.
(2) Orientation 2 is the cell geometry after mirroring the x coordinates with
    respect to orientation 0.
(3) Orientation 3 is the cell geometry after a rotation of 180 degrees with
    respect to orientation 0 (which is the same as a mirror of the y coordinates
    with respect to orientation 0 followed by a mirror of the x coordinates).
(4) Orientation 4 is the cell geometry after a combination of a mirror of the
    cell's x coordinates followed by a 90 degree rotation of the cell with
    respect to orientation 0.
(5) Orientation 5 is the cell geometry after a combination of a mirror of the
    cell's x coordinates followed by a -90 degree rotation of the cell with
    respect to orientation 0.
(6) Orientation 6 is the cell geometry after a 90 degree rotation of the cell
    with respect to orientation 0.
(7) Orientation 7 is the cell geometry after a -90 degree rotation of the cell
    with respect to orientation 0.
The row is the row number in which the standard cell resides.

Each line of the global routing or <designName>.pin file consists of 9 fields
of information concerning an active pin. An active pin is a pin which will
participate in the minimum area global route of the circuit in the following
format:

NETNAME GROUPNO INSTANCE PORT X Y CHANNEL LOC LAYER

where the fields are defined as

string integer string string number number integer integer integer

Pins which are inactive, that is, pins which are not used in the minimum area
global route, are not included in this file.

The fields for each active pin are now presented. The first field represents the
name of the net attached to the pin. The second field is an integer which
represents the group number for the pin. The group numbers are globally unique.
That is, each net has its constituent pins broken down into groups such that the
pins with a common group number are to be interconnected. Two pins belonging to
the same net but with different group numbers are not to be interconnected.
Hence, a channel or detailed router is not to be given the net name for a pin,
but rather the group number in order to achieve the minimum area layout. For
clarity, the user may wish to give both the net name and the group number
(in the fashion: netName_groupNumber) so that the label for a pin produced on
a plot contains the net name. In any event, the group number must be given to
the channel or detailed router in order to achieve the routing density reported
by TimberWolfSC.

The third field is a string representing the name of the instance to which the
pins belongs. All instance names are unique within a design. All pseudo cell pins will be suffixed with a number to insure uniqueness. All explicit feed through
instances will begin with the prefix twfeed.

The fourth field is a string which represents the port name. (Remember, port
names are unique with respect to the cell model). The fifth and sixth fields
are a pair of numbers representing the x and y coordinates of the location of
the pin. These numbers are expressed as integers.

The seventh field represents the channel number to which the pin belongs.
Horizontal core region channels are numbered (starting at 1) from the channel
below the first row. The last channel is numbered (numRows + 1). All I/O channels
have zero assigned to their channel field.

The eighth field is a location field. It is an integer which takes on one of
four possible values (- 2, - 1, 1, 2). A net, which must leave a horizontal
channel and enter a vertical channel does so by means of a pseudo pin at either
the left end or right end of a horizontal channel. A pseudo pin at the left end
of a horizontal channel has this location field set to - 2 and a pseudo pin at
the right end of a horizontal channel has this location field set to 2. The
name of a pseudo pin is: PSEUDO_PIN and it is said to lie on a cell named:
PSEUDO_CELL. A pseudo pin will be included in two different group sequences -
a core subnet and a I/O subnet. The unique pseudo instance name allows for
matching between these two sequences. This simplifies connectivity checking
on nets, which contain many pseudo pins. This is furnished as an aid for
detailed routers.

If a pin is located at the top of a channel the field is set to 1. If a pin
is located at the bottom of a channel the field is set to -1.

The ninth and final field is an integer indicating the layer assigned to this
pin.  If no layer is assigned, this field will be set to zero.

In summary, the nine fields for an active pin port are:
1       Name of net to which the port belongs.
2       Group number of the port.
3       Cell name to which the port belongs.
4       The name of the port.
5       The x-coordinate of the port location.
6       The y-coordinate of the port location.
7       The channel to which the port belongs.
8       Whether the port is at the top (1), bottom (-1), left end (-2),
        or right end (2) of the channel.
9       Layer.


Programming Language: C

Known portability issues:

  Systems whose compilation systems default to unsigned characters need to
use -DHAVE_SIGNED_CHAR as a portability flag.
 
Reference:

W. Swartz and C. Sechen, "A New Generalized Row-Based Global Router,"
Proc. of ICCAD, 1993, pp. 491-498.

W. Swartz, "Automatic Layout of Analog and Digital Mixed Macro/Standard
Cell Integrated Circuits," Yale Thesis available
http://www.internetcad.com/thesis.htm

C. Sechen and K.W. Lee, "An Improved Simulated Annealing Algorithm for
Row-Based Placement," Proc. of ICCAD, 1987, pp. 478-481.

C. Sechen and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, "The TimberWolf Placement and
Routing Package," IEEE J of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 20 No. 2, 1985,
pp. 432-439.

C. Sechen and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, "The TimberWolf Placement and
Routing Package," Proc. 1984 Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, Rochester,
New York, May 1984.
